[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Groundbreaking new studies
reveal the connection between
your gut health
and mental health.
This is "Gaia News."
Researchers have known
about the connection
between the bacteria
that live in your gut
and in your brain for some time.
But when it comes to revealing
how closely they are connected,
science has just
scratched the surface.
Now in a systematic analysis
published in the journal
"Clinical Psychology
Review," researchers
looked at 26 studies that
assess the role of gut biology
plays in anxiety and depression.
The findings showed people
with anxiety and depression
had different levels and
different types of microbes
in their gut compared to people
without anxiety and depression.
The digestive tract of people
with anxiety and depression
contained more proinflammatory
bacteria species
and had less of the type of
bacteria that help regulate
the central nervous system.
Naturopathic medical
Donese Worden
had this to say on the
gut brain connection.
>> We know that everyone's
microbiome or those bugs are
like a fingerprint.
Everyone is unique.
None of us look alike.
And the newer studies
are showing us
how much more of a link
there is with mental health
in the combination of
the bugs that we have
and the diversity
is the big key.
The more diverse the bugs
are, the more bugs you've got
and types of bugs,
the better off
you are with mental health
and many other diseases.
>> Do we know how the brain and
digestive tract are so closely
connected?
>> When it comes to those
trillions of microorganisms
and how they affect us in
this brain-gut immune access,
we're learning more and more.
Some of the proposed
mechanisms of how
that communication happens--
one of them is
through what we call
the enteric nervous system.
That is a communication pathway.
Another one is the vagus nerve.
And that vagus nerve affects
the autonomic nervous system.
And that again is about
the brain, and the gut,
and how that affects everything.
Others are proposed mechanisms
are tryptophan metabolism,
how we metabolize that.
And the immune system itself
is a communication pathway.
And it utilizes those
bugs in good and bad ways.
>> How could the study of our
microbiome help treat mental
health conditions, as
well as other diseases?
>> We're not far enough yet to
say we use this bug for this
disease, but I think that
we're getting closer.
And we do know certain
ones that look like they
are helping with cancer.
What we do know is that,
in particular, people
that are depressed,
they're more likely to have
a different species of bacteria
in their digestive tract.
Now remember, we're all unique.
We have a unique
fingerprint but how do I
look compared to someone else?
And those differences
we're starting to see
plays into, oh, if you have
more of this species of bug,
you might be more likely to
struggle with depression,
or anxiety, or mental
health than if you
have more of these bugs.
It's about the ratio.
It's about the diversity.
We know that.
And someday in the
near future, we'll
be able to use
probiotics and the bugs
specifically for specific
diseases and that's exciting.
>> Although this review did
show fascinating results,
it's important to remember
mental health issues could be
caused by multiple factors.
>> There are many things
that play into mental health.
The microbiome is
only one pathway.
But we do believe that
the microbiome in that gut
may be telling what we call
tyrosine and tryptophan how
to transform into
serotonin and dopamine.
And that affects
all mental health.
So it's exciting
to know that we've
got some positive,
wonderful things coming down
the line that we may be able to
utilize instead of pharmacology
for the mental health illnesses.
>> What can people at home
do with this information?
>> So what we know right now
that can help all of us is that
the more diverse the bugs that
we have, more different types,
the better.
And those bugs, by the
way, will be personal.
What you should be taking,
saccharomyces boulardii
may be good for one person
but not for the next.
So until we know that,
I think it's the safest
to say let's rotate
our foods, our
probiotics, and remember
that diversity is key.
And that's where
health comes in.
>> The authors of this review
were encouraged by these
findings for prevention and
therapy but recommend more
research into this area.
Until then, remember to keep a
healthy diet for your physical
and mental health.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."